add "async await on stable rust!" blog post (#443)
rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org: posts/2019-10-30-Async-await-stable.md

---
layout: post
title: "Async-await on stable Rust!"
author: Niko Matsakis
---

**On this coming Thursday, November 7, async-await syntax hits stable
Rust, as part of the 1.39.0 release.** This work has been a long time
in development -- the key ideas for zero-cost futures, for example,
were [first proposed by Aaron Turon and Alex Crichton in

> 2016][zcf-rust]!  -- and we are very proud of the end result! We

Author: Yeah, good call. Altogether too many `!` =)

believe that Async I/O -- and async-await in particular -- is going to
be an increasingly important part of Rust's story.

While this first release of "async-await" is a momentous event, it's
also only the beginning. The current support for async-await marks a
kind of "Minimum Viable Product" (MVP), and we expect to be polishing,
improving, and extending it for some time.

Already, in the time since [async-await hit beta][aa-beta], we've made
a lot of great progress -- including making some [key diagnostic
improvements][diag] that help to make async-await errors **far** more
approachable. If you'd like to get involved in that work, check out

> the [Async Foundations Working Group][wg] -- if nothing else, you can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the [Async Foundations Working Group][wg]. You can also
```

help us by filing bugs about polish issues or by [nominating those bugs
that are bothering you the most][nom], to help direct our efforts.

# Major developments in the async ecosystem

Now that async-await is approaching stabilization, all the major Async
I/O runtimes are busily at work adding and extending their support for
the new syntax:

* the [tokio] runtime [recently announced a number of scheduler
  improvements][tokio-sched], and they are planning a stable release
  in November that supports async-await syntax;

> * the [async-std] runtime [has been putting out weekly releases for the past months][as-releases], and plans to make their

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* the [async-std] runtime [has been putting out weekly releases for the past few months][as-releases], and plans to make their
```

  1.0 release shortly after async-await hits stable;
* using [wasm-bindgen-futures], you can even bridge Rust Futures with

>   [JavaScript promises];

Reviewer 3: Link for this?

  (you can use the [0.3.0-alpha][] releases now);
* finally, async-await support is starting to become available in higher-level
  [web frameworks][wf] as well.

[futures]: https://crates.io/crates/futures-preview
[tokio]: https://tokio.rs/
[zcf-rust]: https://aturon.github.io/blog/2016/08/11/futures/
[wasm-bindgen-futures]: https://docs.rs/crate/wasm-bindgen-futures/0.2.16
[aa-beta]: https://blog.rust-lang.org/2019/09/30/Async-await-hits-beta.html
[diag]: https://blog.rust-lang.org/inside-rust/2019/10/11/AsyncAwait-Not-Send-Error-Improvements.html
[wg]: https://rust-lang.github.io/compiler-team/working-groups/async-await/
[nom]: https://rust-lang.github.io/compiler-team/working-groups/async-await/#nominating-issues
[tokio-sched]: https://tokio.rs/blog/2019-10-scheduler/
[as-releases]: https://github.com/async-rs/async-std/releases
[0.3.0-alpha]: https://rust-lang-nursery.github.io/futures-rs/blog/2018/07/19/futures-0.3.0-alpha.1.html
[hyper]: https://hyper.rs
[hyper#1805]: https://github.com/hyperium/hyper/issues/1805
[async-std]: https://async.rs/
[wf]: https://www.arewewebyet.org/topics/frameworks/

> ### Async await: a quick primer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Async-await: a quick primer
```
(And in other places; use one style consistently)

*(This section and the next are reproduced from the ["Async-await hits
beta!"][aa-beta] post.)*

So, what is async await? Async-await is a way to write functions that
can "pause", return control to the runtime, and then pick up from
where they left off.  Typically those pauses are to wait for I/O, but
there can be any number of uses.

You may be familiar with the async-await from other languages, such as
JavaScript or C#. Rust's version of the feature is similar, but with a
few key differences.

To use async-await, you start by writing `async fn` instead of `fn`:

```rust
async fn first_function() -> u32 { .. }
```

Unlike a regular function, calling an `async fn` doesn't do anything

> to start -- instead, it returns a `Future`. This is a suspended

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, it returns a `Future`. This is a paused
```

help us by filing bugs about polish issues or by [nominating those
bugs that are bothering you the most][nom], to help direct our
efforts.

# Major developments in the async ecosystem

Now that async-await is approaching stabilization, all the major Async
I/O runtimes are at work adding and extending their support for the
new syntax:

* the [tokio] runtime [recently announced a number of scheduler
  improvements][tokio-sched], and they are planning a stable release
  in November that supports async-await syntax;
* the [async-std] runtime [has been putting out weekly releases for the past few months][as-releases], and plans to make their
  1.0 release shortly after async-await hits stable;
* using [wasm-bindgen-futures], you can even bridge Rust Futures with
  [JavaScript promises];
* the [hyper library][hyper] has [migrated][hyper#1805] to adopt standard Rust futures;
* the 0.3.0 version of the [futures-rs library][futures] will support
  async-await and will be released at or around the time async-await hits stable
  (you can use the [0.3.0-alpha][] releases now);
* finally, async-await support is starting to become available in higher-level
  [web frameworks][wf] as well.

> 

Reviewer 4: Feel free to mention [futures-intrusive](https://docs.rs/futures-intrusive/0.2.0/futures_intrusive/) as a novel user of async/await and pinning that allows for 100% allocation free async synchronization primitives (channels, mutexes, etc). I don't really like self-promotion, but OTOH I think the concept is cool that it might be worth mentioning it.  It was also only possible to implement due to the properties of async/await in Rust.

In contrast, in Rust, calling an async function does not do any
scheduling in and of itself, which means that we can compose a complex
nest of futures without incurring a per-future cost. As an end-user,
though, the main thing you'll notice is that **futures feel "lazy"**:
they don't do anything until you await them.

If you'd like a closer look at how futures work under the hood, take a
look at [the executor section] of the [async book], or watch the
[excellent talk][video] that [withoutboats] gave at [Rust LATAM 2019]
on the topic.

[the executor section]: https://rust-lang.github.io/async-book/02_execution/04_executor.html
[video]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=skos4B5x7qE
[Rust LATAM 2019]: https://rustlatam.org/
[withoutboats]: https://github.com/withoutboats
[async book]: https://github.com/rust-lang/async-book

### Summary

We believe that having async-await on stable Rust is going to be a key
enabler for a lot of new and exciting developments in Rust. If you've
tried Async I/O in Rust in the past and had problems -- particularly
if you tried the combinator-based futures of the past -- you'll find
[async-await integrates much better with Rust's borrowing

> system][bc]). Moreover, there are a now a number of great runtimes and

Reviewer 5: unmatched bracket!

Reviewer 5: "there are a now" => "there are now"
